Yes, exactly. And so we expect this should be about an hour, it should be a little less,
okay? So today is the 27th of June. This is Dr. Adiola Darwis, 2019. I'm here with
Vanessa Cyril. Can you say your full name for me?
Vanessa Camilla Cyril. I'm posh, but Camilla.
Camilla.
Lovely. And what were your parents' names?
Carita and Hilton.
Okay. And what were their professions? What did they do?
My father worked on the big ships and my mother done sewing, she done cooking,
she done everything what to do in the Caribbean. But she used to do a lot of embroidery as well.
So, you know, all sorts of stuff.
Did you have siblings?
Yes.
How many?
Three brothers and three sisters, but I lost a brother when he was age 11. And I lost a sister,
she was only a baby. What I'd say is called death now that I know.
Oh my gosh. That must have been really traumatic for your mother.
I think my brother may have been thinking of it autistic.
Okay.
And you know, they didn't diagnose it then.
Yeah.
So I lost Elvin to that nice boy.
11 as well.
So he was 11 and my sister was just, I think it was a cut death. My mother got up one morning and
she was dead.
Oh my gosh. And where are you in the line? Are you first, second?
I'm the second. My brother's first, I'm the second. I've got another sister after me.
And then Elvin, one died, and then Marcella, and Ursula, the makeup.
Okay. So you're the first girl.
Yeah.
Do you remember growing up in St. Louis?
Yes. Yes. Growing up, well, I think it was quite happy.
Growing up, you know what it's like in the Caribbean.
Aunties and uncles and extended families and so everybody was your cousins.
And I say sort of waffling in the rain, going up to the country when you have holidays.
Seeing people digging yams and picking the breadfruit and they're watching the bats on their
cashew nuts. There's a fruit under the cashew nut. Cashew nut on top of this fruit and watching the
bats and all the mango trees and running up looking the river for crayfish. So it was quite
happy. And we didn't live far from the sea actually. We could go out about, I would say, 10
minutes and you'd be watching the ships come in and there'd be lots of tourists as well.
And not far from the beach, the beach would take you about half an hour because you all
had to walk then. We'd have all these like buses and things. So we'd walk through shortcuts at this
chap. I think his father may have been a slave master and he had this big white house on a hill.
Nothing around it but lots of trees, mango trees, gore, things. So we'd walk past there,
a little shortcut where it was really trees on either side and quite creepy.
You'd go on the beach and sometimes watching the aeroplane coming in and it was not coming across.
And you'd go on the beach and you'd have barbecues like they put stones on and have something.
Frankly I didn't swim because I remember starting to swim and then you were quite
cruel to sort of duck you in on that. You know children play.
Was that your siblings or your friends?
Yeah, friends and siblings and Esther swam along, my sister, but I didn't like the thought of them
sort of ducking you to see if you can get up.
And what year were you born?
43.
In 43. So it's St Lucia. What was St Lucia like at that time around?
It was like then loads of children around you because people had six, seven, eight,
nine, how many children? And then you had what I can remember from going to school as a
sort of I would say five years old, four or five, I remember going to school with my brother holding
hands and the beginning my mother used to take us and after that we'd walk through a big park
they call the gardens because the school was just overlooking it and we'd walk through there
and we were told not to go on a merry-go-round which we would do after school as well.
And we'd get into school. I remember the teachers making dresses and doing all these sorts of things.
We had to go a lot of handicraft there and on Christmas time we'd do all the loops for the
decorations and all these things and I remember them doing this punch in a thing where,
I don't know what they call it now, it's like wool or cotton whatever you punch for a thing
and you can make like horses and animals and roses on this material. Lots and lots of good
things I remember them doing. And also play we skip, we play tiki-taka. I don't remember.
Tiki-taka, no.
Well the stones, you'd have lovely stones, collect nice stones and it's on the ground
we'd play it and then we'd see who pick up. They'd pick up the stones and it would go like that and
over there and try and pick up some more and see. Yes, it's like you throw it up and pick up more.
Yeah tiki-taka and we skipped a lot. We got the big group from the mahogany tree, you know these
big groups that would be around the mahogany tree, we'd go and look for that and cut it and
skip with that you know. A bit of time we'd have rooms but it would scratch all your skin you know
and see you can skip better, you can go up, you can go down, you know so lovely time and in the
rain, running in the room when it's raining you know. We didn't know the rain water was good for
our skin you know and we did run in the rain and I remember what you washed your hair with it was
like the hibiscus leaves at times you'd have your hair washed of that and then they'd use their
aloes, not the aloes, the other flat one. What did Mekans call it? Single Bible? No,
the single Bible aloes. Anyway it was a flat one it hasn't got the um pickles on it and they use
I think it's a family of the aloes and they use it and they scrape it and that condition your hair
with castor oil in it and yeah and um because I remember confirming my cousin Cecilia was so
talented and first time I had my hair pressed you know and um for my confirmation and you know
doing my hair and then putting it in like brown paper rolling it in brown paper and ready for my
confirmation and she crocheted I think she knitted all socks and crocheted my post she was very
talented my you know these socks up to here she really knitted them nicely you know um
what did I call it? Cucumber pattern like little holes in it you know very very talented and my
first women dress it was nylon first time I wore nylon and um pleated skirties people done these
things by hand and pleated it under um like um cold um cloth on top of the pleats and
and then I had tucks all over and then little sequins in the middle and the same just the
sleeves of little sequins and um I met the lady when I came over to Boonum I met the lady who made
that dress so um I was very proud of you know me oh my gosh yeah growing up was quite good actually
um lots of friends calling I think I selected my friend my sister didn't care which was always in
some sort of problem but I was on the other side quiet so I just like my books and have a little
core of friends so um and um then well what would you wear at school and when you had your school
report I was just thinking I said you're trained with that now took it to your god mother and your
god father you took it to your auntie and your father and everybody would tell you well you
better learn better you know do well do well school and the earliest one that to aim for is
B's probably or is A's nothing below that you know really yeah but I had a wonderful teacher
Mrs. Patterson she had no children she was good you know she gave me some lessons after as well
so um you know I was privileged in a sense and I think the school I went to was quite a good
school this you see the Roman Catholic I teach him about praise and hope
but I had a very good name that school for good academic students you know what I mean that some
of them left and went abroad and studied and got scholarships you know island scholarships
so I must say my childhood I quite enjoyed it you know and Christmas day I'm having new clothes
and new year's day because we had four holidays
Christmas and new year we had new dresses and there was this like a fair people made ice cream
homemade ice cream made fresh cream like this make that so you'd be going in the day in the evening
with all the people then we were told not to go on the buses because these buses were quite
productive hard seats on big old dodge buses and we'd go but keep our head down in the
tunnel so somebody knew our parents and then we'd be shouting singing you know um
baube baube why are we meaning the policemen have um why are we mean um
wires that's all rotten you know baube why are we and then there'd be a lady I I think she
might about dementia I didn't know children and they used to say Marcelli's a gagging
what does that mean well they say black magic and Marcelli was a black magic person you know
but I'm sure she was deep alley and talking to herself and all this thing but you see she was a
gagging and well she's a sick driver driver truck let me go they had this music driver truck then
I'm not in a puppy show oh yeah so yeah so it was good meeting your friends and then
I joined the church choir so after choir practice we'd walk around town a group of us
and go and look at the windows you know because I didn't realize St. Lucia was a place for a lot
of the small islands came to shop people from there because it had everything you know um
so we'd go and look at all the shop windows because you always glass windows of stuff you
know advertising women dressed up in mannequin dress up in materials and clothes and
and then walk around with our friends and um then go home through the lanes that were dark you know
sounds amazing it really really does when I think of it I said to peter
I had a good friend and we two like dressing the same you know and I remember one new year
he had yellow nylon and it was long wasted a black velcro on the long waist a little black
velcro we thought it was cat's whiskers I need a nice flat shoes in a band across
but apart from that my father didn't um I get hay fever oh gosh shoemaker as well
so sometimes you know he'd make shoes and I thought I don't like it but you know I'm so pleased
because I never had any problems with my foot you know if you have these cones or that you need
somebody for my foot that if I have to buy you should make shoes and that would cost me a fortune
but all the skills these people had or a ship was mostly going to Canada chilling that coming down
because it was a tourist ship um lady Nelson and um all around one of them anyhow there were two of
them and I'd have to wait as soon as he's coming quickly to go and get the stuff because they
didn't spend much time like a day home and then they didn't give them much time out to work come
and visit home and he'd bring me some lovely things you know they've got a nice school bag
and plaid you know and lots of pens and things like that so yeah so um I would say my school days
were quite happy so travel was quite normal as well kind of moving between the islands and I
would go to um my aunt didn't left one of my aunts left to go to Marchenic to work and she worked for
the American Embassy as a cook there and I used to get lots of magazines as well um and so I'd go
and spend time with uh travel on these little aeroplanes then spend time with my aunts so I had
to speak French not just K-all I had to speak proper French introduce me to all these people
and he'd take me to pictures and so it was sort of confusing because he tried to speak English with
me I remember laughing at a young man tried to say the shoe black because in French you say
I always remember that joke he said
in English so um that was nice there because we'd send to the shop deliberately to go and speak
a lot of them speak short as well but you wanted me to speak French by going and buy
um
and they kissed a lot there was a lot of kissing of the French people because they greet you for
kiss on either side there's only no I think over here they do it in Britain I mean the last few
years because you never used to you know and shake your hands and so and then they kept lots of
wine and they'd give you a damn of red wine and a damn of white wine they never drank tea
and they'd get cups of coffee and um when you went everybody you know in my teen years they'd
offer you some red wine these little um aluminium tumblers you know and you say it's good for you
it's good for you to drink but now we know what red wine is good you know so god has a big damn
jar of red wine wow and where I saw an open supermarket before they had it in central
showers in Martinique and the cakes and things were beautiful like all shampoo and all this
open supermarket and I remember her giving me dope shampoo and they still have it in France
I went to France once it's still a dope shampoo and this and you know I was watching the fur and
saying god how lovely it's open so it's not just here like in supermarket was open and the party
said the cakes were beautiful you know so I made friends they haven't got their numbers or anything
now but growing up I made friends in Martinique as well and um then met Peter you know went to
you know teenage dance so we all got my sister and I got a teenage dance and a whole group of us you
know because this was this teenage dance a different holiday and um it was a gang of girls
standing up and talking and then I think he asked my sister to dance so he came which one he said
he asked her and I don't know she asked somebody else asked her to dance so then he said can I dance
and you know we all danced and we all so then because the boys asked me to all my grandchildren
I started teenage dance I went to a teenage dance restaurant
I was lovely dressed for a combo by anybody
so um that was it and um Peter was sort of um imprinting and I worked for a little while
because I was waiting to go into nursing I was still young so I worked for a little while
through a chap while in a big shop I was doing the bookkeeping sometimes we even go around and
we didn't have all these things that were the big ledgers and doing the bookkeeping
still laying each other to watch out I think they were quite prominent and his brother had
a lot of the supermarkets back home and I used to do that you know all the people a lot of the
people got to know them and um between that
and then my brother came over
no more aunt came over here in the 50s my husband was here before I think he came over the same as
the queen queen's coronation and an aunt came over and then my dad sent my brother over and then
Peter came then after and my sister came before me
because my mother said let her go up Esther was different King was quiet on the side
Esther was always in a scrape so she came up but she wouldn't stay in Newport my aunt thought oh
she's here she left because my aunt then was older having children and she thought Esther had
invested it off to London which all her friends we did that's what we've seen everything happening
in London you know dances and this and that whereas Newport we didn't know many people
we had lots of people from Jamaica but you know the islands that even though a lot of the things
we do the same but we're still this thing at the beginning I thought oh it's a little small island
small island they didn't and sometimes I thought it was a little bit derogatory
you know we had the same thing but it was always this small island people so
so it was just another family the Comptons and my aunt and I think Marion
about three or four other families from St. Lucia. So you always wanted to do nursing? Yes I wanted
to do teaching or nursing and you know very young they take you into the teaching profession there
and you're teaching and while you're teaching you're going to one college or
teachers college or after that you can just expand and you know there's a limit of how you can go
and then I always liked nursing I wanted to do nursing and I was a little bit young to go in and
when I sat the exam they said you know in the next 18 months or something I can come but then
after a while when my aunt was here she encouraged my mother so send her over you know she can do it
over here blah blah yeah people said oh you do it in England the certificate is good and you can
travel you can go anywhere so um I thought oh I'll come over here instead. And your boyfriend was
already here at the time? Yes. What were you expecting before you came? What did you think?
I just thought it was an adventure I just sort of somehow I'm coming to Loon and whatever but um
I don't know you know I just stand by the sea and see all this this this the sea and the sky meeting
and that's and I wonder what's behind that you know and um you know when people ask me I just
would ask them if I didn't think a little bit apprehensive because I thought I'm leaving friends
I'm leaving friends you know but lots of my friends had come over here as well any of their
mothers were they sent to them more and those were teenagers come over and I just thought I'm
coming over I'm watching the nurse and I'm you know looking forward to all of that so um. Was it
hard leaving your mum? It was hard leaving families you know crying and you know it was very hard
but I think when we're young yes you think it's so sad and it's so hard and leaving said Gloucester
you had all this carefree life you know and you went to church on Sundays you didn't have a big
coat on you so um yeah it was hard but at the same time I thought I'm coming over my brothers
here my sister here so I had this nuclear family yes so I didn't think twice I just asked them
Do you remember the journey? Yes I had on this big ship and I mean I was young and this lady said
to me I think she came home and she said oh I got Margaret I forgot her brother's name the two were
coming over couple years young and we could have been nice to look after them because they
were my dad. How old were you? I was just over 17 years old and their mum and dad were over here
so it wasn't unusual just as a problem happened now because wasn't it usual
you were coming over then a child of four or five you know they'd give it to auntie to say bring
and she'd have the child on her passport so that's why a lot of the problem happened because
you're still and somebody might have gone to live in Boomin and whatever when your passport gone
so you don't know where just you know although they are disembarked on cars I don't know if it's
right there but anyhow so Margaret and her brother so we shared the same cabin because her brother
might have been Lemo 12 and a couple of the young ladies from St Lucia so it was fine you know got
dressed you know our dress was made got dressed and come up and I had coats sent for me by my aunt
and this and you know and that's all enjoy yourself we stopped in Tether Reef walked around there
got to Barcelona I and somebody sort of take charge I don't know he was from St Lucia and you
know people always say oh all of you all stay together and that because the ship had everybody
you know from the islands Grenada and then from Barcelona I thought I thought you went under the
Alps after a lot of over here we did try the Alps but I didn't know under the Alps then to um
France to Calais Calais to Dover Dover to Waterloo Waterloo to Paddington
and then my aunt was my aunt husband was waiting and um
Peter so um yeah so there we are so what was the first impression when you stepped off my first
impression I thought the train took so long how far we got to go because then we had this
coal-fired train probably take maybe three hours I think we left late the night I think I got to
me but early hours of the morning and then I saw these houses I thought was one big house
so there's one big house people living in you know the terrace houses all the chains what is
chain is for you know and and then two days after we decided we're going out it was not my aunt
it was um one of the ladies from St Lucia we call her Auntie Auntie men do you want me to put there
no I don't and um Auntie man said come on why not because I was my nickname come on we're going
now we're going to the shop so there is me I remember having a polka dot long waisted dress
had nice lace around there lace around there and just a little cardigan and a little bag and
said come on you know we're going out I was crying at a bus stop is how to school you didn't tell
us call after I've caught he said oh I thought you would feel the cold so that was cool and we
went around town at Marks and Spencer looking at stuff and all that and then as a first first
of the coal and me because it was still cold in April so um so you came in April yeah okay geez
is
so you were here um you had family here which was good and you had Peter here as well um and then
did you start immediately going into nursing or no what I did I went to look for a job as a secretary
and going to this place um they said the job was then everyone when I got there I think was some
little counter thing and they peeped and they said oh there was no job then do you want some water
I'm okay but you might I've got some water thank you
yeah
and um that was my first little thing of um racism tell me oh she said a big smile
oh no no no we haven't got any jobs there so um that was it then and
and
what did I do there was a factory and so I worked a few hours there
and I was terrible what kind of work did you have to do it was dreadfully I think it was doing nails
and that sort of thing and you have to pack stuff and I thought that's not for me so I worked part
time in often was a tb hospital then but I think they changed it in cafe marbly just as a
observer you know um sort of going into nursing looking at that and then after I worked um
for a couple months before I went into this anyhow the new sin thing was they wanted me to
sit exam again so when I applied and I told her you know I done this and oh I don't know if you
could do the exam because what happened a lot of nurses were coming they were recruiting them from
home I think a lot from barbed us as well barbadoz June and recruiting them from home and they were
coming straight to the different hospitals with yorkshire newport wherever but I didn't come on
that scheme then I decided to do my thing and she said I don't know if you sit here I don't know if
you pass the exam so I thought you know there again because they recruit oh you've got to be
sent by your own government or something but I said I've come here I'm invited have you come here
I didn't have to be sent by my government so I sat the exam and then I got into nursing she said
I thought I should be allowed to see today that tutor so there's my nursing career started
and that was my fault as a problem as well as on the streets with racism and discrimination
people calling your names and then so tell me more about the experience on the streets and
experience well it come to your face you know black this or black that go home you don't want
you here or as you invited sometimes you don't get noticed sometimes you call you know you just
look at them and then you'd see them looking for that curtain window you know if you're passing by
it was Auntie men no she was jesus said because you watch so um and that's what you had and you
think why did I I wanted to go back after I thought well cold hair although it was the
the spring then you have people not accepting
you then they'd be asking a question which I thought was stupid like what oh why did you
do your english what house did you live in houses did you live in trees if I wanted to be funny I
say I lived in trees I don't know what houses are like here isn't it good I learned english hey
you know in a couple months I am I learned the english isn't it good look at me
so you know I will give them the answer and you know you'll be traveling on the bus
and you know they didn't want to see me the bus fall they didn't want to sit by you
because um you're not one of them
um and you know you go to the shops I think I wrote something like that sometime I was giving
a talk ages ago and you try and give them money they they wouldn't want your hand to touch them
they want the money though yeah the money drop and then they'd see you standing there but
you know they'd be looking at somebody come after white person come after and then ask them what they
want and you know that sort of thing I had to face so whatever opportunity I had I'd be going
to London I didn't want to live in London but I'd be going to London weekends and you'd end up in
Brixton market on the Harrow Road in Paddington and it was back in the Caribbean because wherever
you walk you see black faces you know um in Brixton I mean it was mostly Caribbean people then you
know from Jamaica from Trinidad St Lucia you name it the same so Harrow Road would meet a lot of
people from St Lucia as well being from the villages what and you know it's patois patois
they speak in there everybody's meeting Creole you know they greet you in Creole first and then
you know start the English or then into Creole again so then you go to weddings and christianings
there's always something happening down there what was the greeting let me hear it
it's a cafe it's a cafe it's a cafe bonjour all right in westam Wales
eh it's a country you live in you know
west of London nah so um Peter had a very good friend there and we go to his place my sister was
there go to her then she'd take me around people that I know you know let's go and visit this one
let's go and see this one you know so it was you know you really liked it because
they had a real Creole being spoken a lot of people there was from a village kind of
reusable most of them were light skinned you know some had blue eyes and then he spoke Creole because
in castries those spoke Creole and English but from around the coast in the other villages a lot
of them spoke Creole first English after so you had a Creole going on and the Dominicans would meet
a little bit different same and so you meet all these people you know and then you'd hear the
Creole band because I think one day I don't know what happened with Estonia laundry at the first
year something of somebody there you know and I said oh I said there's no need for all of that
the woman said to me you come from where you come from you um you don't know anything about
St Lucian so I said to her
so um yeah so it was nice going then then after all that St Lucian dances Trinidad and Tobago
dances I used to go to that you know and um then you'd meet you know sort of there's people I
didn't see for years and I met them at I think it was a Trinidad dance we went and I met them there
and surely when I call her cousin she's with him then she'd tell me if it was going on then we'd
have a carnival session we'd meet up a whole gang of us I'd go to my brother in Brent
we'd cook something then we should leave the car we walk up from um this chickenham road and then
we'd go to the carnival and we had a spot where we all stood and if one went somewhere somebody
stayed there we all meet up together and we would jump up and buy food and buy this and that and
eat and then all midnight she was living in Kent so sometimes I'd stay at her place because oh come
come we all live together actually my cousin was my aunt was very religious then very religious
joined the Jehovah's Witness but I think it was because she felt a sense of belonging there because
my aunt is spat in her face you know on the bus and she came there so I think this was a sense of
belonging and um Auntie Men was the same you know and they sort of joined the two of them joined
the Jehovah's Witness but you tried again but you joined I wouldn't oh my last you know you
wouldn't go to heaven I said what aunt I don't want to go to heaven anyhow so oh there are lessons
you have people to come and give me lessons both of us I said anyhow I said I can't believe in
some of the things you're saying because I've seen blood save people and you don't believe in
blood transfusion and all that business and no birthdays because when I had my sons it was
a celebration of different gifts for them you know because my aunt didn't believe in birthdays
not Christmas I didn't believe in Christmas so you just as do no Christmas thing you know
because um because I lived with her for a while and then imagine Christmas come come from the
caravan and she's so religious you know very very but I think she turned that way because
of the discrimination she faced so um yeah and then my journey into nursing I had the boys in
between you know going to the nursing I had um Trevor Nigel a couple years in between them
how old were you um when you had your first I was 22 okay and then had Trevor Nigel and Mark so
in between that during um nursing as well so then I carried on with my nursing career as well as
week nights when the children were small so I'll be there in the day you know all the sort of things
I had a week having them and um on holidays I'd ask could I do um some people be a month for nights
or six weeks like can I do your six weeks and I do my month as well
and um so somebody would be there because Peter would shifts and someone would be there to help
them you know so it was hard very hard then at the beginning I didn't want to stay
I wanted to go back I thought I can't be staying here I'd be caught it's cold you can't go to the
beaches you want the church if you didn't although you went to Church of England we're
Church of England people but then you got up in the morning it was nice and bright so you were
sat 10 o'clock then you went to evening mass then you went Sunday school but it was so different
hey you know I think they still had the same I went to the Anglican church when I lived a little
further down from here at one time and there are people asking where did you learn the hymns
I thought I do belong to the Anglican church the bishop then was nice try to you know and
when the nuns knew Peter was Roman Catholic then a couple nuns came home and said oh we have to
question the church so um yeah so my experience in the beginning now I just wanted to go home and I
thought my goodness me you're supposed to be well educated people but little did I know our problem
was more educated than some of them you know and all the things you see all these people smell or
something and I think first thing I'd see on the bus I thought we have to do that the girls have
their makeup spit on their hand and then when they're chewing through their dumb yoke put it in their mouth
and then the mother's put it in their mouth they just wipe it up and give it to them
I thought no as well as we are you know we washed you know the morning we had to soap and
water you know clean you and then I think oh well there we are
there we are you know iron your clothes and looking good and I thought I couldn't get just
a big courtyard wear everywhere until that little window we had in the summer but um I still thought
oh I love um sewing and auntie used to sew but other auntie men used to sew better so I'd go to
her and say you make this dress for me you do that for me that dress you made an auntie when she
passed away two years ago what a material it had lovely red roses and I know I'll come back and um
auntie made me that dress for me she said you were my little model because I must have been a size
eight then and anything I say oh well that's what the Marks and Spinsby kind of styles
and then she'd come back and you know these people home they've not had pattern cuts
you know and she'd make these dresses covered buttons and we go to London I say oh I like this
and we go to a shop at a raft to buy all the material I wanted this we say oh you better come
and for me to be chatting if we say oh you better come and wait for it and then we go
sure I'll just go it here so that's the hand to take home to do it here and then she'd show me how
to cut on the bias and do this so I bought a sewing machine and I was well aware me pants with the
boys trousers yes there's so a lot and you know because you couldn't afford it with the trim
having things like that oh everybody had something new and you know we'd buy good
shippers by all the material and come back was cheap there and lovely material and I'd auntie
meant sew she said I'll cut for you go and sew it Vanessa and then show me how to knit her
knit booties and lovely things for the boys you know until they say we don't anything they did again
you know jumpers and cardigans I think I needed market to trousers and a little top to go if
needed top and lots of stuff so always kept busy and baking sweet bread for them and cakes and
then all their friends would come there when they went to school you find a house full of men
full of men and when they went into music I come there with somebody with
their saxophone there somebody with this then I could plug into light something then I do in
the middle of the passage and add some new carpet and then I just brought to keep something something
on the drum into the carpet it's the middle of the I come home and I bake a lovely cake
piece for me and the French would read it all even now the boys said we should have toast
so um yeah they they bring their white friends here friends here no bother you know I'd rather
see your friends here then I don't know where you are so they come I bought a new shed once and who
had it they were all the drums and their music in it you know and but um you know they were
quite free I think I was quite liberalized and they were free to do their thing you know
and bring their friends so it sounds like you know you talk about your aunts and how they
used religion to kind of connect to find a sense of belonging and you had going back and forth to
London and here in Creole and then you had the craft you had your you know yeah I done baking I
used to try and do ice on the cakes for Christmas and I used to get these little silver balls put on
and they could say and I know Marco but they're taking out a little bit of the silver balls on
yeah I tried everything you know um you know bacon I don't do a lot now because it's too fat
but I used to bake bread I used to love baking bread for the if all the bread is baked I mean
should see them make rolls and make rock cake we call it and yeah so I think for me I made
I found things to do to cushion the way I was treated you know if I didn't do things like that
I think I'd be dwelling on oh really treating because I think some people sang some people
had mental problem because when you went to hospital you couldn't explain themselves you'd
see it you know then the NHS was one of the most racist place to work at one time you know um
promotion as you'd hear lots of people telling the police in the NHS in these big organizations
it you know they didn't think you should be promoted you should be either clean or staying
down where you are and you still have people in in the lati years working with stinky work
because I didn't wait even four months to work sirvi and think he was a cleaner that passed me
by and going the office to the clerical staff you know in my boss the ones and I think she was
taking everybody to something and this one said are you going venice I say no it's quite neat
I said um I know I'm a blonde and I have a bob but they got black barbies as well you know so
I said well because you know I'm responsible for ABC and then this person is going if you're not
and I'm asking to go oh oh I didn't think she'd know what to say I say well there are black
barbies I know you're the barbies blonde barbies because she was not happy at all and I travel
come to linden with me to draw a college of midwife but you still you know you you sit
and sometimes you could say oh well let's see one of us I said how can I be I say yes I do the same
job as you do but not one of us you know because if somebody comes for an interview interview no
I can't explain this out why you think you can't explain you speak a couple languages
no so I said you always think in the language first before they answer you
I say you probably say that no no no I'm not one of you you know look at me
so but I think doing things and getting apart from working apart from doing these other things
hard at the you know stuff doing so um it cushioned a lot of the blows I think
facing the discrimination racism yeah and you had a good base as a child yes yes that good solid
upbringing because um the friday when I went to the thing in newport and my daughter and she said
I said what made you into what you I said I think racism and discrimination made me into a person I
am shaped to me but I said growing up I had strong people around me and I said a village the community
you know they were urging you on and I said you met people from abroad and you had everybody around
me work they'd done something you know we didn't just sit and you think we were just everybody was
these wonderful people who saw it and in the holiday time I was just going to help miss whatever
you know to do the hems refer go and help whatever if you have to buy the buttons go and buy the
buttons in the shop or what no so you had wonderful people and strong people who shaped you
you know said to you I remember my aunt's one of my aunt's saying to me
don't go and miss your time when you go over there you know but let's do something don't miss your time
over there and do something and I said to people I was just people around I said
you know because thinking of that long journey and all the problems I face you know
let's say persecution they finished beating up you know people laugh I say I got battered and
bruised I said and to come out on this end and you can give younger people the experience because
you had nobody there for you you had to make your decisions and you said which way you go
you know how am I going to handle this because you had no restoration laws then
and even you had that when it came in it didn't do much because when it's got around it is only now
that you can make a person you can say yes and it can go as far as it can go with the screw nature
but you know people say what they want to you and it's only a joke you know and I said I don't joke
if you like I don't want to my plaits in my head now if I see they have their head and I say God
you have a lovely style today oh oh God we don't know what color you're coming to today but I've
never ever gone and touched the hair and see and then they come and touch us at the meeting once
and I have one f-year so why are you doing it I said I don't ever touch your hair why are you
doing it you're not supposed to do that don't ever do it I was so cross at the meeting I said don't
do it I don't do it to you have I ever touched your hair I will comment I'll say oh your style
is really nice today oh they'll ask me I say oh it suits you whether it is not
but I say why do you want to touch my if I went around my you're not yourself and I said I don't
know my end plaits I said my hair was plaited when I was growing up so what's the big deal about
remember I have my hair colored a bronzy color going to the maid said to me oh what was your color
before I said Mrs. James you see me all the time what color was I
I thought you know what then Mark my son was in the cricket thing he's the only black boy
who's in the cricket team in his school so I had a picture I took him to work and had it showing
how you know oh which one is yours ah I said Mrs. James there he is a black boy there
so in the end you call him Caribbean queen and boy where's the Caribbean queen yeah it seems
like you carry a sense of pride with yes where's the Caribbean queen I thought oh so whenever they
said oh there's the Caribbean queen yeah I say I'm a queen to you all did you struggle with that
idea of Britishness yes growing up well as you know in the islands you had to learn everything
British in it Kipling's thing Oliver Twist the charge of the light brigade
Shakespeare Milton you name it we had to learn all of that and we actually cite things as well
and you got to learn all the songs I'm going to screen birthday and you're going to square
your flag and sing you know god bless our queen Elizabeth and blah blah blah you know
and then you salute the flag before you started that's what I was saying to the school children
I said what's the family like now we say this and that and you salute the flag you say your
hymn you say prayers and there you are school starts during the week you go to church so
I said you know a sense of Britishness when you came but after you treat me you say well
why are we really British then because you had to do everything that was done here
and then you came here you were invited to come here you know people there was one village I
thought there was nobody left people just come and you know and and um
and um next thing you come here and you were treated with hostility
you mean your work your work colleague you know um they didn't treat you nice I remember starting
my first sister's post I applied for about five or six of us applied and somebody said oh Pam will
get the job Vanessa knew that few of us as one nation go myself with us white girls and Pam did
get the job and she came he went to miss Morgan I said he said how are you feeling you were just
this inch room and blah blah and I said well everyone said Pam would get the job what was
everyone Vanessa she listened gossip I said everyone she said no I Pam got the job somebody had
the wrong dose of insulin she owned up to it she didn't try and bluff away so that was the edge
she had so miss Morgan said to me um there is a job at the Lydia Vine in Vanessa oh I said it's
too far I can't go up there I'm only living in Newport it was it's Celtic money right are the other
area so I'm not going there anyhow she said I can't because she I'd like you to come for an
interview I said no I can't come and go into the dentist where's your dentist so I hesitated I said
oh it's down the hill there you know care request and da da da I should I come and collect you then
ask the dentist what time you going no it's all right I don't want to go out so I don't collect you
so she did you know she come and collect me I had an interview there
it was the hospital secretary it was her and it was um one of the gps senior gps because it was
a gp unit run by midwife with a consultant to do a clinic once a week there so he said I'll be the
making of you Vanessa you're wrong just big hospital doctors I said that's what you're seeing but I
don't know if I like it I don't know if I like I probably leave you know
but that was the beginning of me I had so much experience you know think for myself because in
the going then you have to go through this and go through that and it was you making a lot of
decisions because the gp is not stationed there the consultant comes once a week and when he did
come and I did a clinic and just do the wheel the blood pressure so do you part Peter oh
oh I thought you were going to know you part tell me if you think you have anything wrong
they just tell me yes so I thought oh so that was the making of me the experience I had you know and
miss Morgan would come see us so yeah
and then I faced hostility to divide Clark she wouldn't give me my pay slip oh I have to go
through stories of you showing me my pay slip because she was banging the middle there you are
the words are there you have an office then office then she could see everything and she was really
hostile so sometimes you'd have a pay slip two days before payday they'd send it down and you'd
have it in the grant but they sent up to and she'd have it there and I went for my piece if I was
used to that no you're not getting until a day no mrs price I worked from I want my piece
so when I run I rang them in the office don't I said am I supposed to have my pay slip one day
because you sent some no I said you can have it it's been up there how many days you can have
your piece well I want to so evil and she come to my face I said if you come any more to my face
well we had this nice staircase very white you know these big houses why I said I threw it up
the stairs so this white midwife went to unseemly surprise just leave her alone well alone she slapped
the girl I think she wanted to slap she did she slapped her in the face
so I thought I said you wanted to do that too but if you'd ever touch me just right should be down
that stairs so um I told my boss mrs james was there mrs james didn't do anything she was quiet
you know that's why mrs price took advantage and then I thought days nothing had been said so I saw
miss morgan the top major and I told her shit about it you didn't say anything I come up here
I said no I expected mr james to tell you and right because she brought all the hospitals
sectorial and you see because of delay union this and that but we move in at her office will
not be there she'll be going right around the back for office and um when they ask um the young lady
because she was a christian she said you turn the other cheek say mrs price yes she hit the girl on
face you know what I think she wanted but as it is when we close at Lydia she found herself working
somewhere in the back of pharmacy so she had nobody to think then she was a lonely old soul
working there and I went to something I met her son-in-law and he was telling me about it was he
was a counselor and he's saying about this mother-in-law mrs price oh if you worked in the
religion and you would admit I said oh yes very good encounter I said and I left that that
she always said you wouldn't have that's a very good encounter
but you faced it everywhere even with a sister I worked with and she was about to retire
you know I come up all enthusiastic and it was really weak in two days but
she used to come up and check what I'm doing and I said you know what
you can look after that you you go on you go and go and do my thing you know
when I'm like crazy ways and telling them but you face it sometimes they do it and they didn't think
you know face it and sometimes you would see what they're doing and then you retaliate or
at times I'd come home because when I had the manager's role looking after the general
practitioner unit down here and another couple of the union people I work with
when I was promoted and that was just giving me a promotion because I had to go through the mill
and they had to ask a chief case about me the new lady took over and people I worked with over the
years oh why she had that rule why she managed because I had to manage them so my boss said you
know what Esther you come yesterday and you've got where you are and they've been there before
you haven't got anywhere and they made my life hell it wasn't easy somebody belonged to the Royal
College of Midwives and she was supposed to be a steward oh well so your grade will be this and
this I say well you can take it away from me if you can you can do it no big deal I say no your
problem this that's the problem I sound like a problem with you all but this is your problem
it's too good for me to be a manager is it but fair play message written was very very good
you know and they went to see Eliza reporting she was horrible to start all sorts of things and then
she said to me don't go out I want you to come down after so why this lady was this in all of
nonsense she asked me so that's why I'm concerned she said every gp I speak to in Newport they've
got a lot of time for sister Cyril and as far as her stuff is concerned I haven't heard anything
from the staff so summing it up they said would you like her to move elsewhere but I still know I said
as long as you realize I'm in charge and I said there's a saying two male crabs don't live in the
same hole and I said somebody's got to be in charge and as long as you realize that but I said every
time they up to the nonsense they come to your side and that and I moved them obviously I'm weak
no I said I'll work with them so but you know what I had to go into two units I had to join
because unison if they have to deal the case they work in with the firm they get somebody
that's not with the firm from Cardiff or London and I was in the college as well purposely for
my practice or if I did my practice touchwood and so then I have to join two unions because I felt
the way they were going people who were looking at you so and then I encouraged them one of my
colleagues was from Guyana Indian Guyanese and she wasn't treated very nice somebody reported her and
I said Jami where are you from why do you have to so many times do this and they'd see her being
struck off so when that new boss came I said there's a problem with Jami she again get get
the notes let me have a look and this sister was a sister as well but she hated black people
and I said Jami if the doctor had continuous monitor why did you let her tell you take off
the monitor and take her to the watch the baby died and the mother said I will see up uniform
off I said why do you like Greta Cotellian anyhow Mrs Drayton Feckley was good the she had five
cases against her by you know foreign doctor orders and liver and and um but she could keep her job as
long as in five years nothing comes up against and then they moved Greta the one who told her
was senior to her and said we'll do this to them and she was horrible to me as a midwife in training
you do what you've been taught to do which is safe and I was delivering a placenta
and she came in myself and my colleague pull it this way I said no that's not what I was taught
so you've got to put your hands on the bottom of the uterus and then ease it comes out easily so
I said I've been taught so I've done my thing what they taught me oh that's what it's going to be
midwives me so a husband somebody's husband was there because then we had the husbands in
and he said that's one puncher so I went to see my tutor told her about having shadowed another time
I I don't know month on nights because I was sort of a senior sister then so I didn't want that
I was looking after a young lady and she had thalassemia but I wasn't happy with the fetal
heart so I said to the assistant of me go on tell sisters was in the office to ring
a doctor for me because I'm not happy oh she comes in and the sin dosimundrup but we're not
allowed to put sin dosimundrup on my eyes was bulging and I thought I said are we allowed to do that
oh well doctor's been up all night he said to me if I can do I thought if anything happened to this
woman my name is there on the notes I couldn't sleep in a day so I rang the office I said is
it something I missed out are we allowed to put sin dosimundrup no greater than it well when I went
into it the following night I called on your sister I wear blue and you wear blue you should
respect what I asked you to do because I would respect what you asked me to do if you asked me
to get a doctor I'd do it why are you doing it why did you do it to me my name if anything
happened to that baby I would be the one or to the mother oh well you know we see the doctors do it so
then after they didn't like in the night I worked with them there were two of them Mrs.
Nicholas and her and the other sister didn't get one so I was in the middle now I was experienced
to be on the shop for working they put into special a woman and he kept coming in to see if I was
asleep so I know what you're coming in for we were evil I guess what she decided 40 something she um
wasn't married to a child or two that she had a baby and I was then a staff midwife on the
board she was coming to I said revenge is sweet no sweet well check her pillows let me put you right
are you all right I said you're ever so sweet
you're ever so sweet but after Jamie's case Mr. Dritten decided to shift them around so
guess where did she work I was a boss then come to work with me she couldn't take it
hmm she she had time off Mr.
Jimmy she had time off sick was a colleague sick I moved down with me tell her you want to work
with me said no you're going to work with Vanessa upstairs because that was a punishment for her for
telling the midwife take the one of the monitor Jamie had a punishment as well I think this was
might have been the severest because she listened to it take the woman off the monitor and Greta had
for not well I thought revenge is so sweet so just thought a turnaround as a student by the way she
treated me so I looked after her so I need to clean it because I still do the clinics now since
she didn't like she still she drinks really she's still how many minutes she going to work at
and she's going to finish up there oh she said well it's a nice finesse there because she wanted
to go and see her husband was buried around which she said and um I said well after her love
and she went with priests and everything went in the night and then he was the right way around but
she couldn't cope with coming to me I'm her boss well goodness me and then in the end guess who her
daughter actually
her wife is locks wow and she came to my ward when she had a baby and her mother came
so let's get I come in non-visiting touch I said fine Greta and I went in her for oh I said I went
to see the baby oh what a lovely baby gosh do that nice complexion
the girls were saying oh you're awful jammies minister you awful he said no and I thought you
know you do things and sometimes it comes back to haunt you but I was nasty I was quite nice which I
looked after quite well and I thought the same thing you did you couldn't stand me and she was
a refugee from the war from oh some of us were a refugee because her name was KUICK
and um I know there you are but the girls some girls wouldn't work your foot and go home they'll
come the night and she's on their goal and what others would undermine me I said I'm more happy
this when I was on the baby I said oh nothing wrong with it and the one day I walk off and I
just walk off the ward so I'm coming back and she come here she had so many trips oh I said I don't
know I said you're too rude but these were the things you had to face with and I don't know why
I got the strength when I think back I said you know how I managed how I stayed oh I didn't go
mental I got the strength to come home and I used to come home and think of my own strategies
how do I handle them and if I had to cry cry home I wouldn't show them and there was another incident
and they were quite horrible this sister wanted Christmas time off I say
you got a new Christmas day you had Christmas Eve off oh and she created I don't know what the
patients are so I didn't say anything till I walk away and our boss says to do some social psychology
or something as senior people and the woman said to me something they said and I said I was sort
of a weakness when I walk away from no she said it's quite a good strength she said because you
will retaliate and then you have to say sorry because you might just go for it
and then I remember I didn't say anything because she kept on patients with her and stuff was you
know god how horrible she is and so I came back I don't know if it's a couple days after she came
into it and I watched her go in the office and I went in the office and I stood behind her I said
we two are in here now come on tell me what you were saying that day it was on call from me said
your racist you want it all and I was banging the officer you want it all I said answer me so
well I never called I said yes you are you're terribly horrible like there was no cause for
that and I said you want everything you selfish yourself sent I was just just really happy
and I said you answer me now two of us are in here so I said answer no so I stood behind the door
well I want to go I said you answer me no I said you're horrid you're horrible person that's all
you're worrying about is my skin I said and the job I mean I said you all have the opportunity
you all could have applied yeah they go and challenge a little go to get a job you know
and um and she came out after I didn't call your name I said I didn't call I tell you what you are
they call you names so but I looked back I said I get all the strength from you know and um
your genius stuff sometimes I'd be for a day go for a day off and then you'd go to my colleague
and say you think I can have a day off tomorrow because um she said well Vanessa was there so
Jenny'd say to me oh she come and ask me I said no Vanessa is coming back you can ask and then I
said well I know I'm black but I'm not invincible oh oh oh and there's a magic shit I said yeah I'm
black but to some of you I'm invincible sorry invisible and um I'm here so why you go to
Jenny and ask I said so in the fainting more than one for but but that was your mechanism coping
sometimes telling them you know and I said I'll come and we'll see I look and then you had students
midwives coming up another time you wanted me to keep a particular side for med students and
student midwives to come and have experience so I didn't at all no delivering at any late
board in the wards because you are 12 bed and I came back the next day this one moved that back
and they tell all the gps owners want to do this and that so one of the gps said I don't think you
have to take orders as well and it does you all have to take orders so another one came in and
I said why didn't you bring me first doctor said I'm not really whatever listening to them
and then ask a student with I say I'm doing some statistics I said this is your job for the week
keep up to date if who's transferring do this and she said you're not telling me she gets paid for
that I said you're a student midwife you want um a report from me I've got to write a report
and I said oh that's what she said is it I said what pay do I get more from you if you're work
weekends you're more pay so um I said sue just kind of say no I told her I'm doing it you know
that was the thing drugs taken they wanted something was missing and they probably write
little letters to each other and somebody intercepted and said Vanessa guess what there's
what I'm not missing and this one said oh we'll get into trouble I said all of you are coming
down with me so my union then I ran and then you investigated and she said when I still
don't have senior people who can infer for them to make sure they counted drugs for me but these
were the tricks and all the things I used to do and then you managed to get to the top to get the
award the midwife of the what was it midwife of the year and obi and when I had the obi I was
weakened and I was working a weekend and I went in and said to the staff because I was in charge
of the whole unit I don't know if I should I don't know if it's good or if it's bad but I was awarded
an obi oh Vanessa obi canobi so that's a big joke so then I left it at that and then the world kept
running where's Vanessa because he must have gone to the canteen and somebody said what's that
midwife of the what you'll be also she was too you had this son of their flowers and oh Vanessa
we thought was just the way you said it we thought you know you weren't serious we thought it was
just something and um flowers and you know the boss kept a party for me you know um invited
I'm singing all these people I've done with risk and equality and yeah so I just I still ask I
still I went to somebody I thought she may have been the one instigated I said who is it to you
no said your sector was asking a lot of questions one time and I forgot that was a year before a
year before that no she said things have to go to the bosses and to tell them and um you know
Vanessa you know you're special special in what I said in my job thing so no you are special I've
watched you and I've watched you some of the people coming from other countries and how you go and
make them feel comfortable and I was like I was like a god for the Somali ladies down there because
you know they wouldn't speak English and remember one she had to have a section of consultancy I'm
not going to touch on tape if I can get somebody and I was really wrong and this midwife said well
I told her I said you can't do that you have to get somebody to interpret so I think I got one of
the registrars he's Egyptian and his I said you're not supposed to do it because it's not your job
but I said by the time you get a few tell others that I said is he going to do it for me Sam
yeah he said he can speak better Arabic than me and then I got a consultant was going to operate
on it fine I said thank you Sam um and because you're not supposed to get doctors to interpret
or whatever I mean sometimes a consultant Jewish sex was happy and if there was somebody sick
because a lot of them were coming over I said you speak I swear you better come over tell me
get an interpreter whatever and she'd do it um so that was the things you know I mean I never saw
anybody coming from a different place it doesn't matter whether poor white whatever I looked after
them just as I looked after anyone I supported the girls wanted to do stuff you know you can do it
let me tell you what to write down you know if I envy you they're supportive papers and then they
were doing this thing well I can't do it but I said I said what have you been doing with me all the
time you've been helping me you've been coming to tell me the woman is bleeding you're telling
the baby is doing what you can put mothers I said you've got vast experience let's go through it you
go and do it and the Philippine ladies they're wonderful a lot interviewing them and people say
they speak English good I said they speak another language they're good so it was um it wasn't easy
but I remember what I had to go through and every solvent can still go through it and I thought you
know no human being should be going through all these things in their life so the laws have changed
now and the laws are a bit stronger for people now but they're still settling some areas
and they think you can't suss them out you know and you suss them out on miles
do you have any regrets about the journey so far I haven't got regrets it made me and into who I am
and I think that I can impart a lot of things onto other people's growing up now because I think what
it is now if people growing up they think they're born here they're going to ready think that oh
I'm all right but you're not all right every sort of thing you come in some bigot who says something
to you or because at one time it was if your name was an African or whatever you wouldn't get an
interview they wouldn't shortlist you whether you're a doctor or whatever and he didn't research in it
and I went I was at a meeting of this chap he's now a doctor but he was a barrister and the two
of them did research in St George's hospital and these people went to get with them
they wouldn't give them and they went and for that he went into medicine and he was working in the
east end of London the same way when I used to go to do before the Welsh assumed it was the Welsh
office so I'd represent them to go to the department of health I was asked to go
and you tell them the people coming from India whatever you know all you need is their property
they haven't got that money to two thousand much pound to do it and you know why don't you allow
them to be on there for a few months we can do their prep encourage them to do it so um
let's go for that meeting the UK USA the US people would come and they'd see what you have to offer
them and you'd see what us have to offer them and it was quite exciting to them because I'll go to
these big meetings and you're a professor what I'm all about I say oh you're a man-made wife
grassroots basically and this chap I call his name from her he was some professor in social
something he said the grassroots people can teach us a lot you know and then I started off I forgot
as you know I mean I got all this experience when I go all over the place when I decided to go into
um recent quality I was the chair when he said to get rid of the equality thing they had in Newport
because some of these men from the other continent they would be doing their own thing working under
the auspices of that and his business they're carrying on so he scrapped and then he asked me
do you think we should yes I said I said I'll have to I'm not doing it for money I said I'm
working and then we had SREC which unfortunately last year it was sort of no funding coming in
but with the head of the council if this and the other if all these people the chief of police
will come to the meeting and then we had SREC and they hated me these men they hated me
woman in the chair and the horn does in the council meeting that you know I'm little in that big
dress and what he said to me and said that woman see we get rid of her I said look Mr Babo I'm not
there because I'm a black one for black people whether you're blue or black if you face
discriminatory because you could face racism as white persons well and discriminatory
I'm there for everyone so one doctor said you're like the person in the in the southern states like
one of the preachers but you had it from some quarters which some of them they don't understand
people from the black community although as Muslims in Africa some of them did not like us as
you know people from Africa you send as well I give them what's for
so you had it all around for being a woman and for being Caribbean black Caribbean you know
yeah and um it shaped me and it shaped me into being somebody who's strong and I mean after
retired and I thought I'll chill out and get sort of a stroke I thought god of all the things you know
I even in hospital I said I tried to write them a letter I went to see them and
I'm the patient you were the consultant and he gave me some tablets said oh we'll follow you
up and see you now and I said is the nurse who's going to check my blood pressure oh she said well
you're a doctor or whatever I didn't get better so I ran the consultant myself she said get down here
um I've never seen a consultant tell off another consultant in front of me
said why didn't find a bed why she said Vanessa I'll get you wherever I'll
scramble get a bed for you to stay in and so I wrote a letter to the hospital
right a friend was embarrassed I said come on and then invite me I said if Princess Anne came
through that door you'd go out of the way to make sure you know I'm a nobody and I'm a nobody and I
come through that door I'm not to see with me you are looking after me now I'm a patient and I said
I wasn't happy with he's telling me I'm all right he said I don't know the thing you're
all right you're walking and this and the other but um Dr Freeman said he should have kept her
in and just looked observe and whatever anyhow I don't know if the outcome would have been better
as my friendship we stayed in the weekend when I said I really care so um and she they were nice
after that country you know I mean good treatment of physios were good and then I said to what
are you doing people because black people don't take the same time as I ran my system or no she
rang me from patent and she was working as a supervisor for the patients the clinics of all
the consultants so she said this consultancy make sure you give her a lot of pain it is expensive
that's what good black people so did you get that one I do not to Freeman she said Vanessa
doesn't matter how expensive it is you're going to have it because I think that's what
somebody does their research they find that's what good black people not all the other tablets so
and so far there I am you're very good I had enough physio because then the physio thing
and I've faced you for many months were busy so my friend's sisters are physio
he found us oh no who said we could not
um
we have to check your heart and you know your heart muscles but you'll have to come back a patient
the next thing I knew they had how many appointments for me going into our you know my heart
muscles of my heart is all right it checked it and everything's fine Vanessa just had a blip
whatever so um and had good physio lots of physio I had
did you did you ever think you would be retiring in this country I thought of retiring my idea was
because I did have the land home and I would have a place built there which
was in the process of being built and I would go home for the winters and come here for the
service because I'd wind it up and work with the girls oh I'll be going over the winters and
they'll come in the summer keep here and then come but unfortunately when I had um this incident
I was you know what that might be a warning your family's and then I thought about it long and had
I so I'll only see Mark because he likes traveling I won't see night on the river because he's taking
him but then you know but Mark loves come you know let's travel and he just fits in you know
and then had some problems with finance I send on I saw this nonsense you know I'll leave it so
two years ago maybe three years ago sold a lot my leg was sorted out and then my aunt let me
a property I sold that as well so you've let go of that yeah and your hands my nephew was so was so
so loyal so good you know home to sell land you know what problems you get
you know home to sell things when I went down in 2014 took him to see everything and got the
papers and everything the man wanted to buy the land around me here he was so anxious and then
he got it sold he done everything he sent the certificate the check went paid him
gave him the number what to do and see me find his house and um he said auntie I say well I'll
have to pay you because at the end of the day if I had an agent no I say you have he had this nice
house but underneath you'd have two flats so I said you know what you want bricks you want this
because you own the house you haven't done it yet and two of you know we can we can have so I said
you saw that she said the flat is yours she sent a picture of the flats the you know the flat is
yours until you come down I'll tell you what there's washing machine the flat is with
three times bigger and you can start laughing your heads off I say you rent it because you have a
daughter come in she just had a little boy two-year-old and you have a daughter she's going
to come then probably want to study that's income for you because it is a lot of money trying to
get your children abroad to study unless they win scholarships and you still have some money to have
them so I say that's income for you and they were so loyal so honest not often because people say
I just learned you said oh you tell me send money and I send money to do that just give it to her
sorted out gone to the people for power of atonement everything then it got it sent via the
full mark was I sent via your phone okay to my granddaughter so until I don't have money you know
never done says clock shooting like flat caps my friend was gonna show me some until you know
those shoes you send god I don't want them every day and I just give them dolly my niece who just
ran she's going home end of the next week so I bought some other clocks with fun because you
know he's got some big money home true huh yes so um you you get and sometimes I think of the
junior I think something will go out of there to be kind to you and I think yes I've been kind
to people so probably a stranger is doing for me or somewhere across abroad you know and even to
the refugees when they came in from Africa my friends are too hot might be a killer I mean we
friended a few of them because some of them spoke French some was Portuguese and some was like the
Belgian French and the ladies have been I say in the snow they have flip-flops they walked around
so there's me try and find where they live and Costa was living somewhere you wouldn't
you wouldn't put your dog in there my place so I went to the council Peter said to me
what let you come back they're going to meetings because I said is it because they're black you're
thinking of the subi and all this thing and these people walking around you know and Costa was here
for two years and I used to invite them cook food for them or get stuff for them and
and they decided to send Costa to her after two years so I said I knew the woman because I used
to go to these meetings I said you can't do that so I said Costa you got all your papers sorting
out the lawyer yes he said I have to wait I said Jane you come and live with me just give him pocket
money and so I asked Pete I told the boys as well and my friend said oh you might have been
a killer in this country when I was driving him but that boy said and he told people from Angolan
and he said God look after you this is a nice person Costa live with me for a few weeks and I
said you learn English now Costa none of this speak in Angolan money so he was listening to
talking to
if he doesn't hear from me for a couple weeks then he'll ring me and he got married at
because his wife has got um mental problem and she was a great maneuver you know anyhow
um Costa then he named one after me and he named one after Peter
and he was in problems about four years ago with the social services
you know he threatened a train well the girl must have said one of the daughters said that social
server come and take the train they come and do this like I had to walk up and down in court they
give the train for fostering yeah the girl said I've had a friend of a pink bed she said no I only
said that you know my father you know I they just enlist in this and police around oh well so I had
to get a papasi the court case you know down in Cardiff going with him I said it was social
because he always accused black men of being aggressive I said when we talk in the Caribbean
we touched we talked but I said you will think it's something sexual and because he speaks two
languages three languages I please book I said you think he's aggressive because he tries to put a
emphasis on the English language he's not aggressive but you always treat black men
and then I said of course the door speak let me speak for you and then the barrister then came one
day I don't know why all this nonsense is going on and he's chatting to me and say this is what
what is happening today you have literally you know he was so very good and went to the lawyer's
room because Maria didn't have a lawyer or somebody an interpreter so I said you supposed I go to
meetings I didn't all the palms and the cams and all these abbreviations are social I'd go to
meetings with him with Maria and I know the chair said she got to have an interpreter and he said
I'll walk out the next time because as they didn't so you see all the racism all the thing they didn't
care so um I think from what I went for I'll never see anybody I'll never see injustice of people
not at all you know because I was
is a very out of all of them is a nice and there's one left and she's in London and there's another
lot from Brazzaville and I think the lot would think come anyone everything Peter is to take
the one boy said he ran through forest and he had terrible six he was a six foot four boy
but his legs was like my wrist his arm was then he had a terrible soreness for his eyes was yellow
we took him to the doctor and because I could explain myself them speak French and I knew that
I was for him to go to look when Peter's car was a little um
a smaller car and we took this tall boy and I was going to him for his treatment and the one day
because the street you forget to ring casualty they wouldn't treat him and so I was working I
got some stuff there I went to their place and I sort of looked at this we don't treat him with
gloves and everything he didn't have anything goes what he didn't have anything like easy was
bad sickling and he was still and girls gave me some stuff and things you know my colleagues and
all but um and two weeks there he said oh no pull not push it pass on Peter said there's a big
river going off first and he wants to preach in two weeks he wanted to be a he's preaching
money making all that thing so this lot I didn't bother I see them occasionally but I
you know and I said well you said it comes after you that's the mother of so-called mother she said
that I don't believe and I said you're going back to brazil for holidays
but of course there's a nice
yeah I think when you have a when you're open and you have that
intuition isn't it yeah you could kind of know make the right kind of choices
um final question I think what what do you think is the value of having these stories
accessible to the younger generation what do you think do you think it matters that other people
hear this I do think it matters because nobody knows your story if you don't give it to them
everybody think you come through the ranks and you find nothing happened
but I think it's still you saying the strength some people could have
the negative and turn it into positive the support you get from families and good friends
and I think the young people need to know or people after me because
it won't always be nice for them it doesn't matter whether you've got all the race relation
rules and the laws and the thing the institution some will come and they practice what they think
is good some will go others come and they think to hell with it because right now we've got
right-wing government in power and you can see it all around and they wouldn't care and it's always
the people who are poor who are black another ethnicity they'll be paying the price so I think
it is nice to have stories and I mean this is just a nutshell of my story I would go on and on
and on with what I had to put up with what I had to endure with everything some nights come in here
crying and thinking have I got to put up with that I think I better go home I gotta go St. Lucia
let's go and that's he by the land I think that's his language
and no I think no you've gone for all of that you had the strength and you had the courage
and you had the tenacity to stand up to people to challenge people as well
and why not could be a home as well
Vanessa Sarah OBE thank you
here
but thank you for your time thank you thank you yeah and I didn't say whatever Peter support from
Peter as well because he faced the same thing we both faced the same thing he faced when he came
here and the first job he applied because he was doing print and I know print was that he went and
he said yes yes we'll have you and the first day he went in he refused to work with him
because he thought he was a white man his name Peter his face he went in to work they tell him
start and he went in and he said he not working I'd rather walk away and the MP heard Mr Hughes
and he went to speak but there was no law stopping that and Peter never forget it
I'll never forget the patient who said to me and she was crippled in a bed
get your blood you're not going to put your black hands on me and Peter's never forgotten
we're not going to work with you you don't want a black man here working
how do you take that and turn that around
I'll show them I'll show them I've been to places I'm the only black woman I don't care
you know I don't care because I've got this inner strength and sometimes I think I stand up to it
I think I've done whoops lazy you know but somebody's got to do it I've stood up for my
colleagues you know I've got this young lady I've seen from Guyana and she's been there for me
she's quite timid and I've stood up for her and when you want to treat her and
and she thinks you're my big sister Vanessa as well as other colleagues oh I'll read her
the footballer Gavin and his mom because she's not quite worried and do this I said look stop
talking stop backbiting her and stood up for her and said you know you just watched Rita you work
and they work with you and they always try to think they can put you into something deep and
there were some good people there were some nice people said me Vanessa you know that that happened
I'm just telling you and if I had a meeting it come to my attention who names mention
and a couple good bosses I'll say three of them were really really good three four Christy was
nice and I just did my work like everyone else delivered the job but I think I gave the best of
what I had in it and so whatever reward I get wasn't because and and some people think I said
outside and say oh you got I said no I didn't ask for it I didn't want it I never I never
done anything for me to get any award I said I did it because I wanted to do it whatever the
best one for me is midwife of the year whatever all these like it's from that